In this letter we disclose the hypermerge family of operations via generic alogorithm and cocursive data structure exposition. This conceptial theory of operation is, upon some specific mutation sequence, directly comparable to what you think that it is, verses how it is described here, is a reflexable comparation shema self describing systemic meta-function of cyberphysical linquistics, as desribed, so misunderstood.

If you are not quite unpacking the above paragraph, I really think you will like this one better. The above is what we can agree is an finite interpretable paragraphical condensation of meaning. In particular one can enumerate the parts of it that are known to be formally understood, because they are also the ones that are commonly inter-informally misunderstood. There is only 60 words in the above paragraph, and if we do not store capitalization in an copy we would have a compact 5-bit and we can agree that this fact is apparently not related to how one can misunderstand the above, but indeed it is totalled 26-based.

AIS and ASCII share an identical 5-bit representation of the 26 letter NATO alphabet. All code breakers must know about the decimal expansion of 1/26, OEIS code A021030. At the higher end of the mathematical abstraction, baroque as it may be, the the symmetric monoidal category. At the C programmer level we are going to be working with corcursive data structures and algorithms that are in the standard system library. This can be hooked into any existing program via system call override, and in the context of the kernel it patches it into our system calling program.

The objects under consideration are only indirectly comparable, this is the nature of a hyperfunction. The objects under consideration are the 60 words in the first paragraph. The dual system of there interpretation is objects considerer. This is the consideration system. This is a system of systems, and it is indexed by the log-theta-lattice. This is just a simple 2d grid as well, and so you can go up,down,left and right, and depending on if you go up or down or left or right this changes the compared interpretation by mutating it or its copy. That is to say, you can change the program or the kernel. And that in reality it doesn’t matter what you are doing, but how you are doing it.
