Hey so, I'm going to give you exact instructions and an essential checklist
form so that you can explore the mission space in simulation to discover both
optimal operations and every kind of way things can go wrong. After each run we
will have a briefing that includes a presentation based on the recording of the
simulation, and compare differences in order to generate varient operational
plans. A spook agent will possibly be monitoring the situationships as they
sometimes become involved in certain matters of interest to the spook agency,
but not to worry, worst he does is put config file suggestions in the box.

I guess this is called training but I think we just get to find out how
fun world can be when we win at total hybrid network warfare. Anyway how to use
this E6B Flight computer thing is a great first lesson, because I have no idea
about it other than there is a slidy bit and a turny bit, and based on the
positions, I guess one linear and one rotational, certain marks line up on
either side of the device, which is the result of one or another of a small set
of fixed calculations. I think thats a good guess, but there is likely
somethings more to know about how to use it in particular, well, any way we
might, as designed or reconsidered so far as the marks on it, perhaps even
aditional fiddly bits.

Well need a 0.7mm ball point pen and paper, and a stamper, photocopier, a
compass, a straitedge and a peice of string. That said get a ball of string, as
things will certainly be getting hairy and the whole thing kinda strings you
out.

The generic explinaier here is that, we are creating a virtual N-D set of
worlds that have entities, structures as such, that are an effective digital
twin, in DoD-speak. N E Wey. We can then interact with them as such, a video
game whoop de do, but the 'missions' of the game are perhaps in some cases
generated by combinations of youtube explainers and pdfs etc, and to beat the
mission we have to essentially fill out a checklist, which might include every
question ever asked about this thingie or that place or those folks, etc.

YOU LEARN/REMEMBER when things are /different/, if you or the sitation don't
change atleast a lil, you won't have nething to remember. Pleasure is obvlivion
and pain focuses you in a rude way, for what its worth, so both are
problematic. This is just why life evolved the joke, you get to snap out of
either mode, fora moment, but small progress is still progress uno.
