1. Motion: To introduce a new piece of business or propose a decision or
action, a motion must be made by a group member ("I move that......") A
second motion must then also be made (raise your hand and say, "I second it.")
After limited discussion the group then votes on the motion. A majority vote
is required for the motion to pass (or quorum as specified in your bylaws.)

2. Postpone Indefinitely: This tactic is used to kill a motion. When passed,
the motion cannot be reintroduced at that meeting. It may be brought up again
at a later date. This is made as a motion ("I move to postpone indefinitely.").
A second is required. A majority vote is required to postpone the motion under
consideration.

3. Amend: This is the process used to change a motion under consideration.
Perhaps you like the idea proposed but not exactly as offered. Raise your hand
and make the following motion: "I move to amend the motion on the floor." This
also requires a second. After the motion to amend is seconded, a majority vote
is needed to decide whether the amendment is accepted. Then a vote is taken on
the amended motion. In some organizations, a "friendly amendment" is made. If
the person who made the original motion agrees with the suggested changes, the
amended motion may be voted on without a separate vote to approve the
amendment.

4. Commit: This is used to place a motion in committee. It requires a second. A
majority vote must rule to carry it. At the next meeting the committee is
required to prepare a report on the motion committed. If an appropriate
committee exists, the motion goes to that committee. If not, a new committee
is established.

5. Question: To end a debate immediately, the question is called (say "I call
the question") and needs a second. A vote is held immediately
(no further discussion is allowed). A two-thirds vote is required for passage.
If it is passed, the motion on the floor is voted on immediately.

6. Table: To table a discussion is to lay aside the business at hand in such a
manner that it will be considered later in the meeting or at another time
("I make a motion to table this discussion until the next meeting. In the
meantime, we will get more information so we can better discuss the issue.") A
second is needed and a majority vote required to table the item being
discussed.

7. Adjourn: A motion is made to end the meeting. A second motion is required. A
majority vote is then required for the meeting to be adjourned (ended).
