Richards American Defense Company is prepared to engage in a warfare of words
with the department of defense to the limits of material support for ukraine
that when consumated to maximum effect would be a sort of soft-coup by proxy
protected by free speech. Richards American Defense Company has reasons to
believe, that the DoD is in possession of large amounts of weapons with
sensitive energetics, meaning a 50 cal or a sudden crushing or shearing effect
caused by nearby energeticly accellerated effects, ie Can I set it off with a
supersonic 3/8 Tungsten ball? What about cookoff in fire? Richards American
Defense Company hereby considers all sensitive munitions, unsuitable and unsafe
on any ship and of immediately zero or negative value such that they should be
immeately disposed of in a suggested borderline geoglypic continious
bombardment operation unseen since the Clinton days. Proper American
Secure Voltage Controlled munitions use various configurations of
elecro-energetic material in combination with a software defined range of
massively parallel microfluidic concocotions for every preculaur configurtion.
Structured Electro-energetic materials provide an opportunity to easily control
the structure of the shockwave and metal jet forces in a precision comparable
to a say a rough oxegen lancing.

It is known that a small sea drone not bigger than flipper the dolphin could
laser penatrate to cause a magazine detonation in 2.6 seconds roughly, and
often the laser attack happens with a concurrent shape charge attack to double
tap on the first tap! "Insensitive Munitions" save the day, as the heat of the
laser indeed can cause release of a coated inertent for self healing munitions.
This technoledgy and its various microstandards and so on will be availible in
a nearby git hub.

I believe that one could not get these dangerous missles out of American's
sights and do be destroyed to useful effect in Ukraine such as the Special
Geoglypic Border Activity. The primitive and barbaric sensitive munititions
sockpiles are a disgrace to American Excellence. What use is any missle that is
not arriving to adjust the occupiers density to a sparsity as soon as possible
that rounds to zero.

Now, it may be the case, that this is a bunch of fucking bullshit, but its
catchy and only a first draft. It's possible that the DoD would like to work
this matter out with the wildly unpreditible nature of Richards bizare and
he is APOE4 gene or whatever the one that gets you Alzhimers. Anyway Really
brilliant guys tend to snap at age 40 for some reason, given that one, if one
was mad smart enough, could simply generate enough sequences, MIDI from the
CNC to the DIC at the DOD, with OSC for OSINT!
