Categorical Representation of
Locally Noetherian Log Schemes
Shinichi Mochizuki
June 2002

Contents:
§1. Locally Noetherian Schemes
§2. Log Structures
Introduction
Let X log be a ﬁne (cf. [Kato1], §2.3) saturated (cf. (the evident étale generalization of) [Kato2], §1.5) log scheme (cf. [Kato1], §1.2) whose underlying scheme
X is locally noetherian. Let us denote by
Sch(X)
the category whose objects are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y → X, where Y is a
noetherian scheme, and whose morphisms (from an object Y1 → X to an object
Y2 → X) are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y1 → Y2 lying over X, and by
Schlog (X log )
the category whose objects are morphisms of ﬁne saturated log schemes Y log → X log ,
where Y is a noetherian scheme, and the underlying morphism of schemes Y → X
is of ﬁnite type, and whose morphisms (from an object Y1log → X log to an object
Y2log → X log ) are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y1log → Y2log (i.e., morphisms for which
the underlying morphism of schemes Y1 → Y2 is of ﬁnite type) lying over X log .
Our main results (which correspond to Theorems 1.7, 2.19, in the text) are the
following:
Theorem A.
(Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian
Schemes) The locally noetherian scheme X may be reconstructed category-theoretically from Sch(X), in a fashion that is functorial with respect to X — cf. Theorem
1.7 for more details.
Theorem B. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian Log
Schemes) The locally noetherian ﬁne, saturated log scheme X log may be reconstructed category-theoretically from Schlog (X log ), in a fashion that is functorial
with respect to X log — cf. Theorem 2.19 for more details.
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

These results are partially motivated by the anabelian philosophy of Grothendieck — cf., e.g., [Mzk], [NTM], for more details. In essence, the diﬀerence is that
in the anabelian case, instead of considering the category Sch(X) of (roughly speaking) all schemes of ﬁnite type over X, one considers the category Ét(X) of ﬁnite
étale coverings of X.
Another important motivating circle of ideas for the author was the work of
[Bell1–4], [Lwv1–2]. The main idea here is (roughly speaking) that instead of
working with set-theoretic objects — such as schemes or log schemes — one should
regard categories as the “fundamental, primitive objects” of mathematics discourse.
From this point of view, it is thus of interest to know — cf., e.g., [John], Theorem
7.24, for the case of sober topological spaces — whether or not schemes/log schemes
may be “represented” by categories (such as Sch(X), Schlog (X log )). Theorems A
and B provide one natural (though most probably non-unique!) aﬃrmative answer
to this question.
Acknowledgements:
I would like to thank A. Tamagawa for the time that he so generously shared
with me in countless stimulating discussions.
Notations and Conventions:
We will denote by N the set of natural numbers, by which we mean the set of
integers n ≥ 0, and by Z the ring of rational integers.

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

3

Section 1: Locally Noetherian Schemes
Let X be a locally noetherian scheme. Let us denote by
Sch(X)
the category whose objects are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y → X, where Y is a
noetherian scheme, and whose morphisms (from an object Y1 → X to an object
Y2 → X) are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y1 → Y2 lying over X. To simplify terminology, we shall often refer to the domain Y of an arrow Y → X which is an
object of Sch(X) as an “object of Sch(X)”. The purpose of the following discussion
(cf. Theorem 1.7 below) is to show that the scheme X may be reconstructed purely
category-theoretically from the category Sch(X).
In the following discussion, we shall often speak of various properties of objects
and morphisms of Sch(X) as being “category-theoretic”. By this, we mean that they
are preserved by arbitrary equivalences of categories
∼

Sch(X) → Sch(X  )
(where X  is another locally noetherian scheme). To simplify notation, however, we
omit explicit mention of this equivalence, of X  , and of the various “primed” objects
and morphisms corresponding to the original objects and morphisms in Sch(X).
Proposition 1.1. (Characterization of One-Pointed Schemes) Let us refer
to schemes whose underlying topological spaces consist of precisely one element as
one-pointed.
(i) If X is nonempty, then there exists an immersion Y → X from a reduced
one-pointed Y into X.
(ii) The reduced one-pointed objects Y of Sch(X) (i.e., objects which are spectra
of ﬁelds) may be category-theoretically characterized as the “minimal objects”,
i.e., the nonempty objects for which any monomorphism Z  Y in Sch(X) (where
Z is nonempty) is necessarily an isomorphism.
(iii) The one-pointed objects Y of Sch(X) may be category-theoretically characterized as the objects for which there exists (up to isomorphism) precisely one
monomorphism Z  Y in Sch(X) (namely, Yred → Y ) from a reduced one-pointed
object Z to Y .
Proof. We begin with assertion (i). By replacing X by an open aﬃne in X, we
may assume that X is the spectrum of a noetherian ring A. Then assertion (i)
follows from the fact that such a ring possesses at least one maximal ideal.

4

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Next, we turn to assertion (ii). Since an immersion is a monomorphism, the
suﬃciency portion of assertion (ii) follows formally from assertion (i). As for necessity, let Z  Y be a monomorphism to a reduced one-pointed Y . Thus, the
diagonal Z → Z ×Y Z is an isomorphism (since Z → Y is a monomorphism), so
Z → Y is unramiﬁed. Since it is also clearly ﬂat (since Y is the spectrum of a ﬁeld),
we thus conclude that Z → Y is an étale monomorphism. Since Z is nonempty, we
thus conclude that Z → Y is an isomorphism, as desired.
Finally, we verify assertion (iii). Necessity follows from the existence of the
monomorphism Yred  Y ; the fact that every monomorphism Z  Y (where Z
is a reduced one-pointed object) necessarily factors through Yred ; and the necessity
portion of assertion (ii). To prove suﬃciency, observe that the condition stated in
assertion (iii) implies that every nonempty open subscheme of Y is equal to Y (cf.
assertion (i), applied to the open subscheme and its complement). In particular,
the underlying topological space of Y is connected and of dimension zero. Since Y
is a noetherian scheme, this implies that Y is one-pointed, as desired. 
Corollary 1.2.
(Characterization of Smooth Morphisms) The smooth
morphisms Y1 → Y2 of Sch(X) may be characterized category-theoretically as those
morphisms which satisfy the following property: Let Z0  Z be a monomorphism
of one-pointed schemes. Then any commutative diagram
Z0
⏐
⏐


−→

Y1
⏐
⏐


Z

−→

Y2

admits a morphism Z → Y1 such that both of the resulting triangular diagrams
commute.
Proof. One veriﬁes immediately that a monomorphism of one-pointed schemes
is necessarily a closed immersion. Thus, Corollary 1.2 is a formal consequence of
Proposition 1.1, (i), (iii), and a well-known characterization of smoothness (cf., e.g.,
[EGA IV], Corollary 12.1.7, Proposition 17.14.2). 
Corollary 1.3.
(Characterization of Open Immersions and Coverings) The open immersions Y1 → Y2 of Sch(X) may be characterized categorytheoretically as the smooth monomorphisms. A collection Zα → Y (for α ranging
over the elements of some index set A) of open immersions of Sch(X) is a covering if and only if every monomorphism P  Y , where P is a reduced, one-pointed
scheme, admits a factorization through some Zα .
Proof. This is a formal consequence of Corollary 1.2; Proposition 1.1, (i) (applied
to the complement of the union of the images of the Zα ), (ii); and [EGA IV],
Theorem 17.9.1. 

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

5

Next, let us recall that a sober topological space is one for which every irreducible closed subset has exactly one generic point (cf. [John], Deﬁnition 7.21, (ii)).
If T is a topological space, then we shall denote the category of sheaves on T by:
Shv(T )
Here, we implicitly wish to think of Shv(T ) as a “topos over some ﬁxed category of
sets Ens” (cf. [John], p. 113). In fact, since the natural geometric morphism of
topoi Shv(T ) → Ens is unique up to canonical isomorphism (cf. [John], Proposition 4.41), we shall take the liberty of omitting explicit mention of the “structure
morphisms to Ens” in the following discussion.
If T1 , T2 are topoi, then let us denote by
Mor(T1 , T2 )
the category of geometric morphisms of topoi T1 → T2 (cf. [John], Deﬁnition 1.16),
and by
Mor(T1 , T2 )
the set of isomorphism classes of geometric morphisms of topoi T1 → T2 (i.e., the
set of isomorphism classes of objects of the category Mor(T1 , T2 )). Then sober
topological spaces admit the following interesting property (cf. [John], Theorem
7.24):
Theorem 1.4.
(Categorical Reconstructibility of Sober Topological
Spaces) Let T1 , T2 be sober topological spaces. Denote by Mor(T1 , T2 ) the set of
continuous maps T1 → T2 . Then the natural morphism
Mor(T1 , T2 ) → Mor(Shv(T1 ), Shv(T2 ))
is a bijection.
Corollary 1.5. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Underlying Topological Spaces) If Y is an object of Sch(X), then denote the underlying topological
space of Y by |Y |. Then |Y | may be categorically reconstructed (up to canonical
isomorphism) from the data (Sch(X), Y ) (i.e., of a category and an object in this
category).
Proof. Indeed, (since |Y | is sober — cf. [John], p. 230) this is a formal consequence
of Corollary 1.3, Theorem 1.4, since the category of sheaves Shv(|Y |) may be reconstructed from Sch(X) as soon as one knows the subcategory of Sch(X) consisting
of open immersions into Y , together with the information of which collections of
open immersions are coverings. 

6

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Ultimately, we would like to reconstruct not just the topological space |Y |
but the scheme structure of Y category-theoretically from the data (Sch(X), Y ).
Thus, to do this, it remains to reconstruct the structure sheaf OY of Y . Since this
structure sheaf is represented by the ring scheme A1Y (i.e., the aﬃne line, equipped
with its usual ring scheme structure) over Y , it thus suﬃces to show that we can
reconstruct this ring scheme category-theoretically.
Proposition 1.6. (Canonical Open Subschemes of the Projective Line)
Suppose (for simplicity) that Y is connected.
(i) The projective line P1Y over Y , together with its labeled sections 0Y , 1Y ,
∞Y over Y , may be characterized category-theoretically (up to unique isomorphism) from the data (Sch(X), Y ).
(ii) The scheme (Gm )Y over Y , together with its group scheme structure and
section 1Y over Y , may be characterized category-theoretically (up to an isomorphism, which is unique — up to the inversion morphism on this group scheme)
from the data (Sch(X), Y ).
(iii) The scheme A1Y over Y , together with its ring scheme structure and sections 0Y , 1Y over Y , may be characterized category-theoretically (up to canonical
isomorphism) from the data (Sch(X), Y ).
Proof. Note that, in light of Corollary 1.5, the proper morphisms of Sch(X) may be
characterized category-theoretically as those which are universally closed and give
rise to closed diagonal morphisms. Then P1Y may be characterized as the unique (up
to possibly noncanonical isomorphism) smooth (cf. Corollary 1.2), proper Z → Y
whose ﬁbers over reduced one-pointed objects of Sch(X) have underlying topological
spaces (cf. Corollary 1.5) which are connected and one-dimensional, and which,
moreover, admit a section σ : Y → Z with the property that the cardinality of the
Y  -linear automorphisms of the data (Z → Y, σ) after base-change to some Y  → Y
cannot be bounded (by a ﬁnite cardinal) independently of Y  . Thus, assertion (i)
follows from the fact that automorphisms of P1Y that ﬁx three non-intersection
sections are necessarily equal to the identity.
Assertion (ii) follows formally from assertion (i) by thinking of (Gm )Y as representing the functor that assigns to Y  → Y the set of automorphisms of P1Y  which
ﬁx 0Y , ∞Y .
Finally, assertion (iii) follows formally from assertions (i), (ii) by observing
that the addition operation on A1Y may be characterized as the unique morphism
A1Y ×Y A1Y → A1Y
which has the expected restrictions to 0Y , 1Y and is compatible with the action
of (Gm )Y on all three copies of A1Y . (Note that this compatibility is simply the
“distribuitivity” property of the addition and multiplication operations of the ring
structure.) 

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

7

If C1 , C2 are categories, then let us denote by
Isom(C1 , C2 )
∼

the category of equivalences C1 → C2 , and by
Isom(C1 , C2 )
∼

the set of isomorphism classes of equivalences C1 → C2 (i.e., the set of isomorphism
classes of objects of the category Isom(C1 , C2 )).
We are now ready to state the main result of the present §:
Theorem 1.7.
(Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian
Schemes) Let X, X  be locally noetherian schemes.
(i) Let f : X → X  be a quasi-compact morphism of schemes. Then the
functor
Sch(f) : Sch(X  ) → Sch(X)
induced by base-change by f has no nontrivial automorphisms.
∼

(ii) Denote the set of isomorphisms of schemes X → X  by Isom(X, X  ). Then
the natural map
Isom(X, X  ) → Isom(Sch(X  ), Sch(X))
given by f → Sch(f) is bijective.
Proof. Observe that, in assertion (i), it is necessary to assume that f be quasicompact in order to ensure that base-change by f preserves the property of being
noetherian. To complete the proof of assertion (i), it suﬃces to show that there
∼
do not exist any nontrivial collections of automorphisms αY : Y → Y which are
functorial in Y , as Y varies among the objects in the essential image Im(Sch(f))
of Sch(f). (Here, the functoriality is also with respect to morphisms in the image
of Sch(f).) Let Y → X be an open immersion in this essential image Im(Sch(f)),
arising, say, from an open immersion Y  → X  of Sch(X  ). Since Y → X is a
def
monomorphism, it follows that αY is the identity. Write PY = P1Y . Let CY be
the stable curve (cf., e.g., [DM]) over Y obtained by gluing together two copies
of PY along the copies of 0Y , 1Y , ∞Y . Then since any automorphism of CY
necessarily preserves the (scheme-theoretic) nodes — thought of, for instance, as
the support locus of the coherent sheaf Ext1 (ΩCY /Y , OCY ) (which is functorial in
automorphisms of CY ) — we conclude that αPY ﬁxes (scheme-theoretically) the
sections 0Y , 1Y , ∞Y , up to a permutation ∈ S3 (the symmetric group on three
letters). But by the functoriality of Z → αZ , we thus conclude that this permutation
lies in the center of S3 (which is trivial), hence that αPY is the identity. From this,
we conclude (by considering the evident open immersion) that αA1Y is the identity,

8

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

hence (by considering ﬁbered products over Y ) that αAnY is the identity, for all
n ≥ 1. But this implies that αZ is the identity for any Z = φ(Z  ), where Z  → Y 
is aﬃne. Thus, by the functoriality of Z → αZ , we conclude that αZ is the identity,
for all objects Z of Im(Sch(f)), as desired.
Next, we turn to assertion (ii). Suppose that we are given an equivalence:
∼

φ : Sch(X  ) → Sch(X)
def

Let Y  be an object of Sch(X  ), write Y = φ(Y  ). Then by Corollary 1.5 above,
we obtain a natural homeomorphism
∼

|Y | → |Y  |
induced by φ, together with, by Proposition 1.6, (iii), a compatible isomorphism
∼
OY  → OY of structure sheaves. That is to say, we obtain an isomorphism of
schemes
∼

φY : Y → Y 
which is functorial in Y  .
Now, let us observe that the objects of Sch(X) which are open immersions
U → X into X may be characterized category-theoretically as follows: First of all,
the objects of Sch(X) given by monomorphisms Y  X may be characterized by
the property that any arrow Z → Y in Sch(X) is the unique arrow from Z to Y .
Among such objects Y → X of Sch(X), the open immersions are those for which,
for every Z0 → Z as in Corollary 1.2, any Z0 -point of Y lifts to a (unique) Z-point
of Y . Thus, by taking Y  equal to various open subschemes U  ⊆ X  , we obtain
(by gluing) an isomorphism
∼

φX : X → X 
which satisﬁes (by the functoriality of φY ): Sch(φX ) = φ (where the “=” makes
∼
sense, in light of assertion (i)). Finally, when φ = Sch(f) for some f : X → X  , it
is clear that φX = f. This completes the proof. 
Finally, before proceeding, we note the following partial strengthening of Theorem 1.7, (i):

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

9

Theorem 1.8. (Further Rigidity Property) Let X be a locally noetherian
scheme. Suppose that for every object Y → X of Sch(X), one is given an auto∼
morphism αY : Y → Y — not necessarily over X! — with the property that for
every morphism Y1 → Y2 of Sch(X), one has a commutative diagram:
αY

Y1
⏐
⏐


1
−→

Y2

2
−→

αY

Y1
⏐
⏐

Y2

Then all of the αY are equal to the identity.
Proof. By considering morphisms as in Proposition 1.1, (i), one sees that every
αY induces the identity on the underlying topological space |Y | of Y . Next, observe
that the stable curve CY of the proof of Theorem 1.7, (i), is, in fact, deﬁned over
∼
Z. Thus, there is a natural isomorphism βCY : CY → CY lying over αY (i.e., the
product over Z of αY with the identity on the evident natural model for CY over
Z). As in the proof of Theorem 1.7, (i), αCY induces the automorphism αPY of
PY , so αPY preserves the sections 0Y , 1Y , ∞Y (up to a permutation). Moreover,
just as in the proof of Theorem 1.7, (i), this permutation is necessarily the identity.
Thus, we conclude that αPY is equal to the isomorphism βPY induced on PY by
βCY , hence that αA1Y is equal to the isomorphism βA1Y induced on A1Y by βPY . But,
by considering sections of A1Y → Y (i.e., morphisms Y → A1Z ), this implies that αY
induces the identity not only on |Y |, but also on sections of the structure sheaf OY ,
i.e., that αY is the identity, as desired. 

10

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Section 2: Log Structures
In this §, we discuss the logarithmic analogue of the theory of §1. Let X log
be a ﬁne (cf. [Kato1], §2.3) saturated (cf. (the evident étale generalization of)
[Kato2], §1.5) log scheme (cf. [Kato1], §1.2) whose underlying scheme X is locally
noetherian. Let us denote by
Schlog (X log )
the category whose objects are morphisms of ﬁne saturated log schemes Y log → X log ,
where Y is a noetherian scheme, and the underlying morphism of schemes Y → X
is of ﬁnite type, and whose morphisms (from an object Y1log → X log to an object
Y2log → X log ) are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y1log → Y2log lying over X log . To simplify
terminology, we shall often refer to the domain Y log of an arrow Y log → X log which
is an object of Schlog (X log ) as an “object of Schlog (X log )”. Note that by associating
to an object Y → X of Sch(X) the object Y log → X log of Schlog (X log ) obtained by
equipping Y with the log structure obtained by pulling back the log structure on
X log via Y → X, we obtain an embedding
Sch(X) → Schlog (X log )
— which thus allows us to regard Sch(X) as a subcategory of Schlog (X log ).
Let Y log be a log scheme. Then we shall denote its underlying scheme (respectively, the morphism of monoids deﬁning its log structure) by Y (respectively,
expY : MY → OY ). Thus, we have an exact sequence of étale monoids on Y
0 → OY× → MY → PY → 0
— where the “characteristic” PY is deﬁned so as to make the sequence exact. If
Y log is ﬁne (hence integral), then we have injections
PY → PYgp ;

MY → MYgp

(where the superscript “gp” denotes the group associated to the monoid in question).
If Y is reduced (respectively, one-pointed — cf. Proposition 1.1), then we shall
say that Y log is reduced (respectively, one-pointed). Suppose that Y log is reduced
and one-pointed, i.e., Y is equal to the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Then one may think
of PY as the data of a (discrete) monoid equipped with a continuous action of the
absolute Galois group Gk of k. When this action is trivial, we shall say that the
log structure on Y log is split. In this case, we shall denote (by abuse of notation)
Γ(Y, PY ) by PY .

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

11

Proposition 2.1.
(Local Structure of Monoids) Let Y log be a reduced,
one-pointed ﬁne saturated log scheme with split log structure. Then PY is a ﬁnitely
generated, torsion-free, integral saturated monoid, with no nonzero invertible elements. In particular, PYgp is a ﬁnitely generated torsion-free abelian group.
Proof. Indeed, since torsion elements of PY are necessarily invertible, and the
properties “ﬁnitely generated”, “integral”, and “saturated” follow from the deﬁnitions, it suﬃces to verify that PY has no nonzero invertible elements. Suppose that
fP ∈ PY is invertible. Then since OY× is a group, any lifting (which exists étale
locally on Y ) fM of fP to MY is invertible. On the other hand, by the deﬁnition
of a log structure (cf. [Kato1], §1.2), the invertibility of expY (fM ) implies that
fM ∈ OY× , so fP = 0, as desired. 
Lemma 2.2.
(Pointwise Nature of Log Structures) Let Z log → Y log be a
morphism of ﬁne log schemes. Let Σ ⊆ |Z| be a subset of the underlying topological
space |Z| of Z such that every open subset of |Z| containing Σ is equal to |Z| itself.
∼
Suppose further that Z → Y , and that for every geometric point ζ of Z whose image
∼
in Z lies in Σ, we have PY,ζ → PZ,ζ . Then Z log → Y log is an isomorphism.
×
×
, PZ,ζ = MZ,ζ /OZ,ζ
, it follows that
Proof. Indeed, since we have PY,ζ = MY,ζ /OY,ζ
∼
∼
PY,ζ → PZ,ζ implies that MY,ζ → MZ,ζ . Thus, our hypothesis on Σ, together with
∼
the coherence of the log structures involved implies that MY → MZ , as desired. 

Proposition 2.3. (Monomorphisms of Fine Saturated Log Schemes) A
morphism Z log → Y log in Schlog (X log ) is a monomorphism (in Schlog (X log )) if
and only if Z → Y is a monomorphism in the category of schemes, and, moreover,
gp
gp
for every geometric point ζ of Z, the induced morphism PY,ζ
→ PZ,ζ
is surjective.
Proof. Suﬃciency is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions (and the fact that for
any ﬁne log scheme S log , MS → MSgp is injective). Moreover, the necessity of the
condition that Z → Y be a monomorphism (in Sch(X), which is easily veriﬁed to be
the same as a monomorphism in the category of all schemes) is a formal consequence
of the deﬁnitions. Thus, to complete the proof of necessity, it suﬃces — by applying
an appropriate base-change — to consider the case where Z = Y = Spec(k) (where
k is a ﬁeld) and the log structures on Z log , Y log are split. If PYgp → PZgp fails to be
surjective, then there exists an artinian k-algebra A (of ﬁnite type), together with
def

a nontrivial character χ : PZgp /PYgp → μN (A) = {a ∈ A× | aN = 1} (for some
def

integer N ≥ 1). If we equip W = Spec(A) with the log structure pulled back from
Z log , then we obtain a morphism W log → Z log in Schlog (X log ). In particular, since
∼
gp
PZ → PW , we may think of χ as a character on MW
which vanishes on MYgp . Thus,
the automorphism α : W log → W log which is the identity on W and which maps
a section f ∈ MW to f · χ(f) has a nontrivial composite with W log → Z log , but a
trivial composite with W log → Z log → Y log . This shows that Z log → Y log is not a
monomorphism, thus completing the proof of necessity. 

12

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Proposition 2.4.
(Minimal Objects) An object Y log of Schlog (X log ) will be
called minimal if it is nonempty and satisﬁes the property that any monomorphism
Z log  Y log (where Z log is nonempty) in Schlog (X log ) is necessarily an isomorphism.
(i) A minimal object Y log is necessarily reduced and one-pointed.
Y

log

(ii) If Y log is reduced and one-pointed, and its log structure is trivial, then
is minimal.

(iii) If Y log is reduced and one-pointed, and its log structure is given by the
chart N 1 → 0, then Y log is minimal.
Proof. Assertions (i) and (ii) are a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions; Proposition 1.1, (ii); and Proposition 2.3. Assertion (iii) is a formal consequence of the
deﬁnitions; Proposition 1.1, (ii); Proposition 2.3; and the following elementary observation: Any quotient of integral monoids N  Q for which Q has no nonzero
invertible elements (cf. Proposition 2.1), and N 1 does not map to 0 ∈ Q, is an
isomorphism. 
Before proceeding, we review the following well-known
Lemma 2.5.

(Monoids and Cones) Let VZ be a ﬁnitely generated free Zdef

def

def

module. Write VR = VZ ⊗Z R; VZ∨ = HomZ (VZ , Z); VR∨ = VZ∨ ⊗Z R. If σ ⊆ VR∨ is
a strongly convex rational polyhedral cone (cf., e.g., [Oda], p. 5), then let
def
us write σ ∨ = {v ∈ VR | v, w ≥ 0, ∀ w ∈ σ}. Then:

def
(i) The correspondence σ → P = σ ∨ VZ deﬁnes a bijection between the set
of strongly convex rational polyhedral cones σ in VR∨ and the set of ﬁnitely generated
saturated monoids P ⊆ VZ which generate VZ as a group.
(ii) Let P ⊆ VZ be a ﬁnitely generated monoid which generates VZ as a group.
def
Then its saturation P sat = {v ∈ VZ = P gp | ∃ n ∈ Z>0 such that n · v ∈ P } is also
ﬁnitely generated.
(iii) Let P ⊆ VZ be a 
ﬁnitely generated saturated monoid which generates VZ
as a group and satisﬁes P
(−P ) = 0; let a, b ∈ P be distinct elements. Then
there exists a morphism of monoids
φ:P →N
such that φ(a) = φ(b), and φ(c) = 0, for all nonzero c ∈ P .
(iv) Let P1 ⊆ P2 (⊆ VZ ) be ﬁnitelygenerated saturated monoids which generate
VZ as a group and satisfy P1 = P2 , P1 (−P1 ) = 0. Then there exists a morphism
of monoids
φ : P1 → N

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

13

such that φ(c) = 0, for all nonzero c ∈ P1 , and the induced map φgp : P1gp = VZ → Z
satisﬁes φgp (P2 ) ⊆ N.
Proof. Indeed, assertion (i) is stated in [Oda], p. 9. Assertion (ii) follows, for
instance, from the fact that the normalization of C[P ] is ﬁnite (by elementary
commutative algebra) over C[P ] and also clearly of the form C[Q] for some monoid
Q ∈ VZ . Since by a well-known argument (cf. [Oda], p. 14), we have Q = P sat ,
this ﬁniteness implies the ﬁnite generation of P sat .

Next, we turn to assertion (iii). The condition P
(−P ) = 0 implies that
∨
the cone σ corresponding to P (cf. (i)) generates VR . In particular, there exists an
element λ ∈ σ such that λ(b − a) = 0. Moreover, λ can be chosen to be lie in the
interior of σ — which means that σ contains an open ball in VR∨ containing λ —
and (since VQ∨ is dense in VR∨ ) to be integral (i.e., λ ∈ VZ∨ ). These conditions imply
that the map λ : VZ → Z determined by λ maps nonzero elements of P to nonzero
elements of N (and a, b to distinct elements), hence deﬁnes a map φ : P → N with
the desired properties.
Finally, we condition assertion (iv). Let σ2 ⊆ σ1 be the cones corresponding
to P1 , P2 , respectively. Since σ1 ⊆ σ2 , and both σ1 , σ2 are closed subsets of VR∨ ,
we conclude that the interior of σ1 is not contained in σ2 , hence that there exists
an element λ in the interior of σ1 such that λ ∈
/ σ2 . Moreover, (since VQ∨ is dense

in VR∨ ) λ may be chosen to belong to VZ∨ . Since P1 (−P1 ) = 0, it follows that
the interior of σ1 is open in VR∨ , so the map λ : VZ → Z maps nonzero elements of
P1 to nonzero elements of N. Since λ ∈
/ σ2 , it follows that there exist elements of
P2 on which λ takes negative values. Thus, λ deﬁnes a map φ : P1 → N with the
desired properties. 
Lemma 2.6.
(Fibered Products of Fine Saturated Log Schemes) Let
log
log
log
Y1 → Z , Y2 → Z log be morphisms in Schlog (X log ). Write
def

log

log
log
log
WSch
×Sch
log = Y1
Z log Y2 ;
def

log
log
Wﬁne
= Y1log ×ﬁne
Z log Y2 ;

def

log
Wfslog = Y1log ×fs
Z log Y2
def

log
Wlog
= Y1log ×log
Y log
Z log 2

for the ﬁbered products in the category Schlog (X log ); the category of all ﬁne, saturated log schemes; the category of all ﬁne log schemes; the category of all log
schemes, respectively. Then:
(i) We have natural morphisms
log
log
log
log
→ Wﬁne
→ Wlog
WSch
log → Wfs

of which the ﬁrst is an isomorphism. Moreover, Wlog may be identiﬁed with the
ﬁbered product Y1 ×Z Y2 in the category of schemes.
(ii) The underlying morphism of schemes Wﬁne → Wlog of the third morphism of (i) is a closed immersion which induces an isomorphism (Wﬁne )red →
(Wlog )red . The underlying morphism of monoids PWlog → PWfine is surjective.

14

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

(iii) The underlying morphism of schemes Wfs → Wﬁne of the second morphism
of (i) is ﬁnite and surjective. The underlying morphism of monoids PWfine →
∼
sat
→ PWfs .
PWfs is injective and induces an isomorphism PW
fine
Proof. Assertion (i) (except for the isomorphism assertion) is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions and [Kato1], §1.6. Assertion (ii) is a formal consequence
of the deﬁnitions and [Kato1], §2.6, 2.8 (cf. also the proof of [Kato1], Proposition
2.7). Assertion (iii) (together with the isomorphism assertion of (i)) follows by
applying the same argument as that of the proof of [Kato1], Proposition 2.7, to
log
the “saturation” of a chart, i.e., if P → MWfine is a local chart for Wﬁne
, then Wfslog
log
is obtained (étale locally) from Wﬁne
by base-changing by Z[P ] → Z[P sat ], where
sat
Spec(Z[P ]) (respectively, Spec(Z[P ])) is regarded as being equipped with the
log structure associated to the evident pre-log structure P → Z[P ] (respectively,
P sat → Z[P sat ]). 
Proposition 2.7. (Minimal Hulls) Let Y log be a one-pointed object of the
category Schlog (X log ). Then a monomorphism H log  Y log will be called a hull
for Y log if every morphism S log → Y log from a minimal object S log to Y log factors
(necessarily uniquely!) though H log . A hull H log  Y log will be called a minimal
hull if every monomorphism H1log  H log for which the composite H1log  Y log
is a hull is necessarily an isomorphism. A one-pointed object H log will be called a
minimal hull if the identity morphism H log → H log is a minimal hull for H log .
(i) There exists a morphism S log → Y log , for some minimal object S log .
(ii) If H1log  Y log , H2log  Y log are hulls, then the product H1log ×Y log H2log
(in Schlog (X log )) is also a hull. In particular, any two minimal hulls are isomorphic
(via a unique isomorphism over Y log ).
log
 Y log is a minimal hull.
(iii) Yred

Proof. First, observe that assertion (ii) is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions.
Next, recall that by Proposition 2.4, (i), every minimal object is reduced and
one-pointed. Thus, every morphism S log → Y log (where S log is minimal) factors
log
log
(uniquely) though Yred
. In particular, Yred
 Y log is a hull for Y log . Thus, for
the remainder of the proof, we may assume (without loss of generality) that Y log is
reduced. By Proposition 2.4, (ii), we may also assume (without loss of generality)
that the log structure on Y log is nontrivial.
Next, let us observe that if Y  → Y is ﬁnite étale, then the result H log ×Y Y  
Y ×Y Y  of base-changing a hull H log  Y log is again a hull. Indeed, this follows
immediately from the deﬁnitions. In particular, to show that any (reduced) Y log is
a minimal hull, we may assume (without loss of generality) that the log structure
on Y log is split.
log

gp
is
Now let H log  Y log be a hull. Then I claim that the morphism PYgp → PH
bijective. Indeed, surjectivity follows from Proposition 2.3, while injectivity follows

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

15

from the following observation: By Lemma 2.5, (iii) (cf. also Proposition 2.1), for
any two distinct elements a, b ∈ PY , there exists a morphism of monoids
PY → N
that maps a, b to distinct elements of N and nonzero elements of PY to nonzero
elements of N. In particular, this morphism of monoids determines a morphism from
a minimal object of the type described in Proposition 2.4, (iii), to Y log . Thus, the
desired injectivity follows from the existence of such a morphism (and the deﬁnition
of a hull). Note that the existence of such a morphism also completes the proof of
assertion (i).
Thus, to complete the proof of assertion (iii), it suﬃces to show that the injection PY → PH is surjective. But this follows by constructing a suitable morphism
from a minimal object of the type described in Proposition 2.4, (iii), to Y log (cf.
the preceding paragraph), by applying Lemma 2.5, (iv). 
Corollary 2.8.
(Classiﬁcation of Split Minimal Objects) Every minimal
object with split log structure is one of the two types described in Proposition 2.4,
(ii), (iii).
Proof. Indeed, this follows by constructing a suitable morphism from a minimal
object of the type described in Proposition 2.4, (iii), to Y log (cf. the proof of
Proposition 2.7), by applying Lemma 2.5, (iii). 
Corollary 2.9.
(Characterization of One-Pointed Objects) The onepointed objects Y log of Schlog (X log ) may be characterized category-theoretically as
the nonempty objects which satisfy the following property: For any two morphisms
Silog → Y log (for i = 1, 2), where Silog is a minimal object, the product S1log ×Y log
S2log (in Schlog (X log )) is nonempty.
Proof. If an object Y log of Schlog (X log ) is not one-pointed, then by Proposition
1.1, (iii), there exist non-isomorphic monomorphisms T1 , T2  Y (in Sch(X)), for
some reduced one-pointed T1 , T2 . Thus, T1 , T2 necessarily have non-intersecting
images in Y . If we equip T1 , T2 with the log structures pulled back from Y , then
we obtain morphisms T1log , T2log → Y log in Schlog (X log ) such that T1log ×Y log T2log
is empty (cf. Proposition 2.6, (i), (ii), (iii)). Thus, if we choose (for i = 1, 2) a
morphism Silog → Tilog , where Silog is minimal — cf. Proposition 2.7, (i) — we
obtain a contradiction to the condition of Corollary 2.9.
Conversely, if an object Y log of Schlog (X log ) is one-pointed, and Silog → Y log
(for i = 1, 2) are as in the statement of Corollary 2.9, then by Proposition 2.6, (i),
(ii), (iii), S1log ×Y log S2log is nonempty, as desired. 

16

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Corollary 2.10.
(Characterization of Reduced One-Pointed Objects)
The reduced one-pointed objects Y log of Schlog (X log ) may be characterized categorytheoretically as the one-pointed objects which are minimal hulls (cf. Proposition
2.7).
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of Proposition 2.7, (iii), and Corollary
2.9. 
Deﬁnition 2.11.
(i) A morphism Y1log → Y2log of objects of Schlog (X log ) will be called log-like if
the underlying morphism of schemes Y1 → Y2 is an isomorphism.
(ii) A morphism Y1log → Y2log of objects of Schlog (X log ) will be called schemelike if the log structure on Y1log is the pull-back of the log structure on Y2log via the
underlying morphism of schemes Y1 → Y2 .
Corollary 2.12.
(Characterization of Log-like and Scheme-like Morphisms of Reduced One-Pointed Objects) Let Y1log → Y2log be a morphism of
reduced one-pointed objects of Schlog (X log ). Then we have the following categorytheoretic criteria for this morphism to be log-like/scheme-like:
(i) Y1log → Y2log is log-like if and only if it factors as the composite of
a monomorphism Y1log  Y3log , where Y3log is a reduced one-pointed object of
Schlog (X log ), with a morphism Y3log → Y2log which admits a section Y2log → Y3log
(i.e., such that Y2log → Y3log → Y2log is the identity).
(ii) Y1log → Y2log is scheme-like if and only if the category of factorizations
Y1log → Y3log → Y2log , where Y3log is a reduced one-pointed object of Schlog (X log ),
and Y1log → Y3log is log-like — i.e., whose objects are such factorizations and whose
morphisms are commutative diagrams
Y1log
⏐
⏐


−→

Y3log
⏐
⏐


−→

Y2log
⏐
⏐


Y1log

−→

Y4log

−→

Y2log

of morphisms in Sch(X log ), of which Y1log → Y1log and Y2log → Y2log are the identity
morphisms — admits the factorization Y1log = Y1log → Y2log as a terminal object.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). The suﬃciency of the given condition
follows from Proposition 2.3 (and the fact that the section Y2log → Y3log is necessarily
a monomorphism). To prove necessity, we construct Y3log as follows. First, let
def
Y  → Y = Y1 ∼
= Y2 be a ﬁnite étale Galois covering (with Y  connected) so that the

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

17
def

pull-backs of the log structures on Y1log , Y2log to Y  are split. Write G = Gal(Y  /Y ).
Suppose that PY1 ×Y Y  is generated by r elements. Write
PG
for the monoid given by taking the direct product of [Y  : Y ] copies of N, one
indexed by each element of G. Thus, G acts naturally on PG . If we equip the
scheme Y  with the log structure deﬁned by the pre-log structure which sends
nonzero elements of PGr (the direct product of r copies of PG ) to 0 ∈ OY  and then
descend (by using the G-action on PGr ) to Y , we obtain a log scheme Y4log such that
PY4 ×Y Y  = PGr .
Next, observe that (by the deﬁnition of r) there exists a G-equivariant surjection of monoids:
PGr  PY1 ×Y Y 
Thus, by descent, this surjection determines a monomorphism Y1log  Y4log .
def

Now set Y3log = Y4log ×Y Y2log . Note that this product yields the same log
scheme, whether taken in Schlog (X log ) or in the category of all log schemes. Moreover, the morphisms Y1log → Y2log , Y1log  Y4log determine a monomorphism
Y1log  Y3log
whose composite with the projection Y3log → Y2log is the original morphism Y1log →
Y2log . Thus, to complete the proof of assertion (i), it suﬃces to prove the existence of
a section of the projection Y3log → Y2log . But the existence of such a section follows
from the (readily veriﬁed) existence of a G-equivariant morphism of monoids:
PGr → PY2 ×Y Y 
(which is not necessarily surjective).
Finally, we verify assertion (ii). Consider the factorization Y1log → Y4log →
def

Y2log , where Y4 = Y1 , and its log structure is the log structure pulled back from
Y2log . One checks easily that this factorization is a terminal object in the category of
factorizations and that Y4log → Y2log is (by construction) scheme-like. If Y1log → Y2log
is scheme-like, then it follows from the deﬁnitions that the factorization Y1log →
Y4log → Y2log is isomorphic to the factorization Y1log = Y1log → Y2log . This proves
necessity. On the other hand, if the factorization Y1log = Y1log → Y2log is a terminal
object, then since a terminal object is unique (up to isomorphism), we thus conclude
that Y1log = Y1log → Y2log is isomorphic to Y1log → Y4log → Y2log , so Y1log → Y2log is
scheme-like. This proves suﬃciency. 

18

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Corollary 2.13.
(Characterization of Restriction of the Log Structure
to a Point) Let S log  Y log be a monomorphism of objects of Schlog (X log ). Suppose that S log is reduced and one-pointed. Then S log → Y log is scheme-like if and
only if it is a terminal object among the arrows T log → Y log over Y log for which
T log is reduced and one-pointed, and, moreover, T log ×Y log S log is nonempty.
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of the observation that the condition
that T log ×Y log S log be nonempty is equivalent to the condition that T and S have
the same image in Y (cf. Corollary 2.9). 
Corollary 2.14. (Characterization of Arbitrary Scheme-like Morphisms)
Let Y1log → Y2log be a morphism of objects of Schlog (X log ). Then we have the following category-theoretic criterion for this morphism to be scheme-like: Y1log →
Y2log is scheme-like if and only if for every commutative diagram
S1log
⏐
⏐




Y1log
⏐
⏐


S2log



Y2log

of morphisms in Sch(X log ), where (for i = 1, 2) Silog is reduced and one-pointed,
and the horizontal morphisms are scheme-like monomorphisms, it holds that the
morphism S1log → S2log is also scheme-like.
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of Corollaries 2.12, (ii); 2.13; Lemma
2.2; and Proposition 1.1, (i) (which implies that any open subset of Y1 that contains
the images of all scheme-like monomorphisms S1log → Y1log is equal to Y1 ). 
Corollary 2.15. (Reconstruction of the Underlying Scheme) Let Y log be
an object of Schlog (X log ). Then the functor
Sch(Y ) → Schlog (Y log )

(⊆ Schlog (X log ))

{Z → Y } → {Z log → Y log }
— deﬁned by equipping Z with the log structure pulled back from Y — determines
an equivalence of categories between Sch(Y ) and the subcategory of Schlog (Y log )
of objects Z log → Y log for which the morphism Z log → Y log is scheme-like and
morphisms Z1log → Z2log (over Y log ) which are scheme-like. In particular, (cf.
Theorem 1.7) one can reconstruct the scheme Y category-theoretically from the data
(Schlog (X log ), Y log ) (i.e., of a category and an object in the category) in a fashion
which is functorial in Y log .
Proof. This is a formal consequence of Corollary 2.14 and Theorem 1.7. 

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

19

Remark 2.15.1. Note that the above proof of Corollary 2.15 furnishes an interesting application of Theorem 1.7, i.e., an interesting instance of a natural situation
in which the category “Sch(Y )” may appear “in disguise” (i.e., as a certain subcategory of Schlog (Y log )). Another (similar) example of the category Sch(Y ) appearing
in disguise is the (classical) theory of (say, faithfully ﬂat) descent: Indeed, suppose
that Y is an S-scheme of ﬁnite type (where S is noetherian), and that T → S
is faithfully ﬂat. Then Sch(Y ) “appears in disguise” as the category of objects of
Sch(Y ×S T ) equipped with descent data for T → S.
Thus, in order to prove the logarithmic analogue of Theorem 1.7, it remains
only to reconstruct (in a category-theoretic fashion) the log structure on an object
Y log of Schlog (X log ). To do this, we use the object A1Y (as in §1), which we equip
with two distinct log structures, as follows: Write
def

AY log = A1Z ×Z Y log ;

def

Alog
= (A1Z )log ×Z Y log
Y log

where (A1Z )log is deﬁned to be the aﬃne line A1Z = Spec(Z[T ]) over Z equipped with
the log structure determined by the divisor V (T ) (i.e., “the origin”). Thus, (one
veriﬁes easily that) we have a natural morphism
expA : Alog
Z → AZ
whose induced map on Y log -valued points may be naturally identiﬁed with:
expY : MY → OY
Moreover, (one veriﬁes easily that) the morphism AY ×Y AY → AY that deﬁnes
the multiplication operation on the ring scheme AY → Y admits a unique extension
to a morphism of log schemes over Y log :
×Y log Alog
→ Alog
Alog
Y log
Y log
Y log
This morphism induces (on Y log -valued points) the monoid operation on MY .
Lemma 2.16.
(Characterization of the Log Structure on the Aﬃne
log
Line) Let Y
be an object of Schlog (X log ). Then the arrow Alog
→ Y log of
Y log
Schlog (X log ) may be category-theoretically characterized as the unique (up to canonical isomorphism) arrow Z log → Y log equipped with an identiﬁcation of the underlying morphism of schemes (cf. Corollary 2.15) Z → Y with AY → Y satisfying
the following properties:
(i) Away from the zero section of Z → Y , the morphism Z log → Y log is
scheme-like.

20

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

(ii) Let Z1log  Z log , Z2log  Y log be scheme-like monomorphisms, where Z1log ,
Z2log are reduced, one-pointed. Suppose that the composite Z1log → Z log → Y log
factors through (necessarily uniquely!) Z2log , and that the image of Z1 lies in the
zero section of Z → Y . Then if the log structure on Z2log is trivial, we assume that
Z1log → Z2log is not an isomorphism. On the other hand, if the log structure on
Z2log is nontrivial, we assume that Z1log → Z2log satisﬁes the (category-theoretic)
condition of Lemma 2.17, (ii), below.
(iii) Let T0log  T log be a monomorphism of one-pointed objects of Schlog (X log ).
Then any commutative diagram
T0log
⏐
⏐


−→

Z log
⏐
⏐


T log

−→

Y log

admits a morphism T log → Z log such that both of the resulting triangular diagrams
commute.
(iv) There exists a Y log -morphism Z log ×Y log Z log → Z log in Schlog (X log ) whose
induced morphism on underlying schemes is equal to the morphism AY ×Y AY → AY
deﬁning the multiplication operation on AY .
Finally, assuming that all of these conditions (i) — (iv) are satisﬁed, the morphism
Z log ×Y log Z log → Z log of (iv) is the unique Y log -morphism in Schlog (X log ) whose
induced morphism on underlying schemes is equal to the morphism AY ×Y AY → AY
deﬁning the multiplication operation on AY .
Proof. First, we observe that condition (ii) of Lemma 2.16 is category-theoretic
— cf. Lemma 2.17, (i), (ii), below. Next, we observe that it suﬃces to determine
the log structure in a formal neighborhood of the zero section of Z → Y . Thus, it
suﬃces to replace Z, Y by étale localizations of Z, Y such that the zero section
Y → Z is compatible with these étale localizations. To keep the notation simple,
we shall denote (for the remainder of this proof) these étale localizations (by abuse
of notation) by Z, Y . Thus, we have a morphism of log schemes Z log → Y log ,
together with a “zero section” Y log → Z log . Also, in the following discussion, we ﬁx
a point z ∈ Z lying in this zero section which is the image of a morphism of ﬁnite
type from a reduced, one-pointed scheme to Z. Write y ∈ Y for the image of z in
Y.
Since we have allowed ourself to pass to étale localizations, we may assume
that the morphism Z log → Y log admits a chart Q → P — where we may assume
that Q (respectively, P ) maps bijectively onto PY,y (respectively, PZ,z ) (cf. [Kato2],
Lemma 1.6, (2)) — i.e., that we have a commutative diagram
Z log

−→


W log
⏐
⏐


−→

Y log

−→ Spec(Z[Q])log

Spec(Z[P ])log
⏐
⏐


CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

21

where W log is deﬁned as the ﬁbered product that makes the square cartesian;
all of the horizontal morphisms are scheme-like; and Spec(Z[P ])log , Spec(Z[Q])log
are equipped with the log structures associated to the evident pre-log structures
P → Spec(Z[P ]), Q → Spec(Z[Q]). Note that z → w ∈ W such that the residue
ﬁelds k(z), k(w), k(y) all coincide. Let us denote this ﬁeld by k.
 log for the formal completion of W log at w. Write W log ⊆
Now let us write W
0
log
log

for Spec(k(w)), equipped with the log structure pulled back from W . Then
W
it follows formally from the above discussion that the monomorphism W0log  W log
factors (uniquely) through Z log → W log , and that the composite of W0log → Z log
with Z log → Y log coincides with the composite of W0log  W log with W log → Y log .
It thus follows from condition (iii) of Lemma 2.16 that we have a morphism
 log → Z log
W
 log → W log with Z log → W log restricts to the natural
whose composite κ : W
 log → W
 log
κ:W
monomorphism W0log  W log on W0log , hence induces a morphism 
(which is the identity on W0log ). Moreover, (by condition (iii) of Lemma 2.16) we
 log → Z log so that the composite of κ with W log → Y log is the
may choose W
 log → Y log . It thus follows formally that the scheme-like
natural morphism W
endomorphism
 log → W
log
κ
:W
is a closed immersion, hence (by the elementary commutative algebra fact that
surjective endomorphisms of noetherian rings are necessarily bijective) an isomorlog the formal completion
phism. In particular, we conclude that if we denote by Z
 log → Z log gives rise to a closed immersion
of Z log at z, then the morphism W
log
 log → Z
W
log → W
 log is κ
whose composite with the natural morphism Z
.
log the ﬁbers of W
 log , Z
log over y. Then by
 log , Z
Next, let us denote by W
y
y
condition (ii) of Lemma 2.16, we have the following inequalities:

y ) ≥ dim(Spec(Z[P ])) − dim(Spec(Z[Q]))
y ) ≥ dim(W
1 = dim(Z
= rk(P gp ) − rk(Qgp ) ≥ 1
y ). Moreover, since Z
y is the formal spectrum of a
Thus, 1 = dim(Zy ) = dim(W
power series ring in one variable over the ﬁeld k (a ring which has no nontrivial
y is,
y → Z
dimension one quotients), we thus conclude that the closed immersion W
in fact, an isomorphism. In particular, if we interpret this fact (cf. the deﬁnition

22

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

of W log ) in terms of the “power series rings” k[[Q]], k[[P ]] (where we note that it
makes sense to consider such power series since Q, P have no nonzero invertible
elements — cf. Proposition 2.1), we conclude that the ﬁber over the closed point
of the range of the morphism
Spf(k[[P ]]) → Spf(k[[Q]])
is isomorphic to Spf(k[[T ]]) (where T is an indeterminate). That is to say, there
exists a surjection (of complete noetherian rings)
k[[Q]][[T ]]  k[[P ]]
(where T is an indeterminate). Since k[[Q]][[T ]] is a domain — indeed, k[Q] is
an excellent normal domain, so its completion k[[Q]], being local and normal, is
necessarily a domain — and dim(k[[Q]][[T ]]) = dim(k[[P ]]), we thus conclude that
this surjection is, in fact, an isomorphism.
In particular, it follows that the morphism
k[[Q]] → k[[P ]]
is ﬂat. This implies — cf. [Kato1], the proof of the implication (iii) =⇒ (v) of
Proposition 4.1, in which it is clear that “k[[P ]]”, “k[[Q]]” may be substituted for
“k[P ]”, “k[Q]” — that the morphism of monoids Q → P is integral, i.e., satisﬁes
the conditions of [Kato1], Proposition 4.1. Moreover, by condition (ii) of Lemma
2.16; Lemma 2.17, (ii), below, the morphism Qgp → P gp is injective, with nonzero,
torsion-free cokernel. Put another way, we have shown that the morphism
Spec(k[P ])log → Spec(k[Q])log
is integral (in the sense of [Kato1], Deﬁnition 4.3), log smooth, and of relative
dimension 1. Moreover, the scheme-theoretic ﬁber of this morphism over the kpoint of the range deﬁned by sending all the elements of Q to 0 is smooth over
k. Thus, by the theory of [KatoF] (cf. especially, [KatoF], Theorem 1.1, (2)), we
conclude that the morphism of monoids Q → P may be identiﬁed with the natural
inclusion:
Q → Q × N
Finally, by Lemma 2.18 below (and condition (iv) of Lemma 2.16), we conclude
that the divisor in Z determined by considering the image under MZ → OZ of
the inverse image in MZ of the element 1 ∈ N ⊆ Q × N = P = PZ is equal
(scheme-theoretically) to the zero section. This completes the proof of Lemma 2.16
(including the assertion at the end of the statement of Lemma 2.16). 

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

23

Lemma 2.17.
(Characterization of Trivial and Relatively Nontrivial
Log Structures)
(i) Suppose that Z log is a reduced, one-pointed object of Schlog (X log ). Then
the condition that the log structure on Z log be trivial may be categeory-theoretically
characterized by the condition that a morphism W log → Z log in Schlog (X log ) is
completely determined by the underlying morphism of schemes (cf. Corollary 2.15).
(ii) Let Z1log → Z2log be a log-like morphism between reduced, one-pointed
objects of Schlog (X log ) with nontrivial log structures. Suppose that the morphism
W1log → W2log obtained by base-changing this morphism by some scheme-like morphism W2log → Z2log between reduced, one-pointed objects of Schlog (X log ) admits
at least two sections. Then the morphism PZgp2 → PZgp1 is injective and has a
nonzero, torsion-free cokernel.
Proof. Assertion (i) is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions and the observation that if the log structure on Z log is split and nontrivial, then Z log has lots of
endomorphisms which induce the identity on the underlying scheme Z — given
by multiplication by a positive integer on PZ . As for assertion (ii), the injectivity of PZgp2 → PZgp1 , as well as the fact that its cokernel is torsion-free, is a formal
consequence of the existence of sections of W1log → W2log (and Proposition 2.1).
Finally, if this cokernel were zero, then W1log → W2log would be a monomorphism
(by Proposition 2.3), hence could not admit more than one section. This completes
the proof of assertion (ii). 
Lemma 2.18.
(Characterization of the Origin) Let A be an artinian
local ring, with maximal ideal mA . Then any δ ∈ mA such that one has
T1 · T2 − δ ∈ (T1 − δ)(T2 − δ) · A[[T1 , T2 ]]×
(where T1 , T2 are indeterminates) is equal to 0.
Proof. Indeed, by induction on the length of A, we may assume (without loss of
generality) that δ ∈ I, for some ideal I ⊆ A such that I 2 = 0. Then for some unit
u ∈ A[[T1 , T2 ]]× , we have:

(T1 · T2 − δ) = (T1 − δ)(T2 − δ) · u
= (T1 · T2 − δ · T1 − δ · T2 ) · u ∈ A[[T1 , T2 ]]
Thus, projecting by A[[T1 , T2 ]]  A (where T1 , T2 → 0) yields δ = 0, as desired. 
We are now ready to state the main result of the present §:

24

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Theorem 2.19.
(Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian
Log Schemes) Let X log , (X  )log be ﬁne saturated log schemes, whose underlying schemes are locally noetherian.
(i) Let f log : X log → (X  )log be a morphism of log schemes, whose underlying
morphism of schemes is quasi-compact. Then the functor
Schlog (f log ) : Schlog ((X  )log ) → Schlog (X log )
induced by base-change by f log has no nontrivial automorphisms.
∼

(ii) Denote the set of isomorphisms of log schemes X log → (X  )log by:
Isom(X log , (X  )log )
Then the natural map
Isom(X log , (X  )log ) → Isom(Schlog ((X  )log ), Schlog (X log ))
given by f log → Schlog (f log ) is bijective.
Proof. First, we verify assertion (i). It is a formal consequence of Theorem
1.7, (i), that any functorial automorphism of the objects of the essential image
Im(Schlog (f log )) of Schlog ((X  )log ) is the identity on the underlying schemes. Moreover, since every automorphism of a log scheme of the form given in Proposition
2.4, (iii), which induces the identity on the underlying scheme necessarily induces
the identity on the characteristic of the log scheme, and the morphisms from such
log schemes (i.e., of the form given in Proposition 2.4, (iii)) to an arbitrary object
(Y  )log of Schlog ((X  )log ) are suﬃciently abundant to “separate points” (cf. Lemma
2.5, (iii)) of the geometric ﬁbers of the characteristic PY  of (Y  )log , we conclude
that the induced automorphism on the characteristic PY  is also the identity. Thus,
by functoriality (and the discussion preceding Lemma 2.16), it follows that it sufﬁces to prove that any Y log -linear automorphism βZ log of an arrow Z log → Y log
satisfying the conditions of Lemma 2.16 such that βZ log induces the identity on the
underlying schemes and characteristics is necessarily the identity on Z log . But since
the subobject L× of MZ given by the sheaf of ideals of the zero section — where we
note that this subobject L× is stabilized by βZ log since βZ log induces the identity
on the characteristic PZ — clearly maps injectively via expZ into OZ (and βZ log
induces the identity on OZ ), we thus conclude that such an βZ log is the identity on
Z log , as desired.
Finally, assertion (ii) follows formally — cf. the proof of Theorem 1.7, (ii)
— from assertion (i); Theorem 1.7, (ii); and Lemma 2.16 (cf. also the discussion
preceding Lemma 2.16). 
Finally, we consider the logarithmic analogue of Theorem 1.8:

CATEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF LOG SCHEMES

25

Theorem 2.20. (Further Rigidity Property) Let X log be a ﬁne saturated
log scheme, whose underlying scheme is locally noetherian. Suppose that for
every object Y log → X log of Schlog (X log ), one is given an automorphism αY log :
∼
Y log → Y log — not necessarily over X log ! — with the property that for every
morphism Y1log → Y2log of Schlog (X log ), one has a commutative diagram:
Y1log
⏐
⏐

Y2log

α

Y

log

1
−→

α

Y

log

2
−→

Y1log
⏐
⏐

Y2log

Then all of the αY log are equal to the identity.
Proof. By Theorem 1.8, every αY log induces the identity on the underlying scheme
Y . In particular, αAlog induces the identity on the underlying scheme AY . MoreY log

over, just as in the proof of Theorem 2.19, (i), since the characteristic of a log
scheme of the form given in Proposition 2.4, (iii), has no nontrivial automorphisms,
one concludes — by applying Lemma 2.5, (iii), to “separate points” — that αY log
induces the identity on the characteristic PY . Thus, we conclude (cf. the proof of
Theorem 2.19, (i)) that αY log is the identity, as desired. 

26

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

Bibliography

[Bell1] J. L. Bell, Category theory and the foundations of mathematics, British J.
Philos. Sci. 32 (1981), pp. 349-358.
[Bell2] J. L. Bell, Categories, toposes and sets, Synthese 51 (1982), pp. 293-337.
[Bell3] J. L. Bell, From absolute to local mathematics, Synthese 69 (1986), pp. 409426.
[Bell4] J. L. Bell, Toposes and Local Set Theories: An Introduction, Oxford Logic
Guides 14, Oxford University Press (1988).
[DM] P. Deligne and D. Mumford, The Irreducibility of the Moduli Space of Curves
of Given Genus, IHES Publ. Math. 36 (1969), pp. 75-109.
[EGA IV] A. Grothendieck, Éléments de géometrie algébrique. IV: Étude locale des schémas
et des morphismes de schémas, IHES Publ. Math. 20 (1964), 24 (1965), 28
(1966), 32 (1967).
[John] P. T. Johnstone, P. T, Topos theory, London Mathematical Society Monographs
10, Academic Press (1977).
[KatoF] F. Kato, Log Smooth Deformation and Moduli of Log Smooth Curves, The
International Journal of Math. 11 (2000), pp. 215-232.
[Kato1] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First
JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press (1990), pp. 191-224.
[Kato2] K. Kato, Toric Singularities, Amer. J. Math. 116 (1994), pp. 1073-1099.
[Lwv1] F. W. Lawvere, An elementary theory of the category of sets, Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 52 (1964), pp. 1506-1511.
[Lwv2] F. W. Lawvere, The category of categories as a foundation for mathematics,
1966 Proc. Conf. Categorical Algebra (La Jolla, Calif., USA, 1965), pp. 1-20.
[McLn] S. MacLane, Categories for the working mathematician (Second edition), Graduate Texts in Mathematics 5, Springer-Verlag (1998).
[Mzk] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, Invent. Math.
138 (1999), pp. 319-423.
[NTM] H. Nakamura, A. Tamagawa, and S. Mochizuki, The Grothendieck Conjecture on the Fundamental Groups of Algebraic Curves, Sugaku Expositions 14
(2001), pp. 31-53.
[Oda] T. Oda, Lectures on Torus Embeddings and Applications, Springer-Verlag (1978).

