COMMENTS ON “THE ÉTALE THETA FUNCTION AND
ITS FROBENIOID-THEORETIC MANIFESTATIONS”

Shinichi Mochizuki
March 2022

(i) The ﬁrst sentence of Deﬁnition 3.1, (ii) [i.e., the deﬁnition of the term “logmeromorphic”], should be replaced by the following text:
A log-meromorphic function on Zlog
∞ is deﬁned to be a nonzero meromorlog
phic function f on Z∞ such for every N ∈ N≥1 , it holds that f admits an
N -th root over some tempered covering of Z log . [Thus, it follows immediately, by considering the ramiﬁcation divisors of such tempered coverings
that arise from extracting roots of f , that the divisor of zeroes and poles
of f is a log-divisor.]
That is to say, the class of meromorphic functions that are “log-meromorphic”
in the sense of this modiﬁed deﬁnition is contained in the class of meromorphic
functions that are “log-meromorphic” in the sense of the original deﬁnition. In
light of the content of this modiﬁed deﬁnition, perhaps a better term for this class
of meromorphic functions would be “tempered-meromorphic”.
(ii) In order to understand the relationship between the modiﬁed deﬁnition of (i)
and the original deﬁnition, it is useful to consider the following conditions on a
nonzero meromorphic function f on Zlog
∞:
(a) For every N ∈ N≥1 , it holds that f admits an N -th root over some
tempered covering of Z log .
(b) For every N ∈ N≥1 which is prime to p, it holds that f admits an N -th
root over some tempered covering of Z log .
(c) The divisor of zeroes and poles of f is a log-divisor.
Thus, (a) is the condition of the modiﬁed deﬁnition of (i); (c) is the condition of
the original deﬁnition. It is immediate that (a) implies (b). Moreover, [cf. (i)]
one veriﬁes immediately, by considering the ramiﬁcation divisors of the tempered
coverings that arise from extracting roots of f , that (b) implies (c). When N
is prime to p, if f satisﬁes (c), then it follows immediately from the theory of
admissible coverings [cf., e.g., [1], §2, §8] that there exists a ﬁnite log étale covering
log
log
log
→ Z∞
to Z∞
is suﬃcient
Y log → Z log whose pull-back Y∞
(R1) to annihilate all ramiﬁcation over the cusps or special ﬁber of Zlog
∞ that
might arise from extracting an N -th root of f , as well as
Typeset by AMS-TEX

1

2

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

(R2) to split all extensions of the function ﬁelds of irreducible components of
the special ﬁber of Zlog
∞ that might arise from extracting an N -th root of
f.
That is to say, in this situation, it follows that f admits an N -root over the tempered covering of Z log given by the “universal combinatorial covering” of Y log . In
particular, it follows that (c) implies (b). Thus, in summary, we have:
(a) =⇒ (b) ⇐⇒ (c).
On the other hand, unfortunately, it is not clear to the author at the time of writing
whether or not (c) [or (b)] implies (a).
(iii) Observe that it follows from the theory of §1 [cf., especially, Proposition 1.3]
that the theta function that forms the main topic of interest of the present paper
satisﬁes condition (a). Indeed, the only instance occurring in the remainder of
the text where the modiﬁed deﬁnition of (i) makes a diﬀerence is the proof of
Proposition 4.2, (iii). That is to say, in this proof, it is necessary to use property
(a) of (ii) [i.e., as opposed to just properties (b) or (c)]. Thus, this situation is
remedied [without any aﬀect on the remainder of the text] by taking property (a)
to be the deﬁnition of “log-meromorphic”. The author apologizes for any confusion
caused by this oversight on his part.
(iv) An alternative approach to the approach of (i) above [i.e., of modifying the
deﬁnition of the term “log-meromorphic”] is the following. One may leave Deﬁnition
3.1, (ii), unchanged, if one modiﬁes Deﬁnition 4.1, (i), by assuming further that
the meromorphic function “f ∈ O× (Abirat )” of loc. cit. satisﬁes the following
“Frobenioid-theoretic version” of condition (a):
(d) For every N ∈ N≥1 , there exists a linear morphism A → A in C such
that the pull-back of f to A admits an N -th root.
[Here, we recall that, as discussed in (iii), the Frobenioid-theoretic theta functions
that appear in the present paper satisfy (d).] Note that since the rational function
monoid of the Frobenioid C, as well as the linear morphisms of C, are categorytheoretic [cf. [2], Theorem 3.4, (iii), (v); [2], Corollary 4.10], this condition (d) is
category-theoretic. Thus, if one modiﬁes Deﬁnition 4.1, (i), in this way, then the
remainder of the text goes through without change, except that one must replace
the reference to the deﬁnition of “log-meromorphic” [i.e., Deﬁnition 3.1, (ii)] that
occurs in the proof of Proposition 4.2, (iii), by a reference to condition (d) [i.e., in
the modiﬁed version of Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)].
(v) In the discussion preceding Deﬁnition 2.1, one must in fact assume that the
integer l is odd in order for the quotient ΔX to be well-deﬁned. Since, ultimately, in
the present paper [cf. the discussion following Remark 5.7.1], this is the only case
that is of interest, this oversight does not aﬀect the bulk of the remainder of the
present paper. Indeed, the only places where the case of even l is used are Remark
2.2.1 and the application of Remark 2.2.1 in the proof of Proposition 2.12 for the
orbicurves “Ċ”. Thus, Remark 2.2.1 must be deleted; in Proposition 2.12, one must
in fact exclude the case where the orbicurve under consideration is “Ċ”. On the

COMMENTS ON “THE ÉTALE THETA FUNCTION”

3

other hand, this theory involving Proposition 2.12 [cf., especially, Corollaries 2.18,
2.19] is only applied after the discussion following Remark 5.7.1, i.e., which only
treats the curves “X”. That is to say, ultimately, in the present paper, one is only
interested in the curves “X”, whose treatment only requires the case of odd l.
×
(vi) The phrase “the unique value ∈ OK
” in the ﬁrst line of Deﬁnition 1.9, (ii),
×
should read “the unique value ∈ K ”.

(vii) The following text should be added after the second paragraph of §1:
Let Tlog be the formal log scheme obtained by p-adically completing the log
scheme deﬁned by equipping the spectrum of the ring of integers of a ﬁnite
extension of Qp with the log structure determined by the closed point.
In the discussion to follow concerning various formal schemes that are
Zariski locally isomorphic to the underlying formal scheme of some stable
log curve over Tlog [for varying Tlog ], we shall frequently have occasion to
work with “divisors” on such formal schemes. Such “divisors” are to be
understood in the following sense: An eﬀective Cartier divisor is a formal
closed subscheme that is deﬁned by a coherent sheaf of ideals I which is
an invertible sheaf. An eﬀective divisor is a formal closed subscheme that
is deﬁned by a coherent sheaf of ideals I which is an invertible sheaf away
from the nodes of the special ﬁber and, moreover, satisﬁes the following
 for the completion of the structure
condition at each node ν: if we write O
 for the ideal of
sheaf of the formal scheme under consideration at ν, I · O
 generated by I, and m ⊆ O
 for the maximal ideal of O,
 then V (I · O)
 ⊆
O
 is the schematic closure of an eﬀective divisor [in the usual sense!]
Spec(O)
 \ {m}. A [not necessarily
on the one-dimensional regular scheme Spec(O)
eﬀective] divisor is a fractional ideal of the form I · J −1 , where I is a
coherent sheaf of ideals that determines an eﬀective divisor, and J is a
coherent sheaf of ideals that determines an eﬀective Cartier divisor; if I
may also be taken to be a coherent sheaf of ideals that determines an
eﬀective Cartier divisor, then we shall say that the divisor given by the
fractional ideal I · J −1 is Cartier.
(viii) In the discussion following the proof of Proposition 1.1, the notation log(qX )
is to be understood as a formal symbol which is used in situations in which we
wish to write the multiplication operation on the multiplicative monoid of regular
functions to which qX belongs additively.
(ix) In the ﬁnal sentence of Remark 1.10.4, (i), the phrase “divisor zeroes” should
read “divisor of zeroes”.
ell
(x) In Proposition 1.5, (i), (ii), the three instances of the notation “Δtp
(−) ) /ΔΘ ”,
Θ
where “(−)” is either Y or Ÿ , should be replaced by the notation “Δtp
(−) ) /ΔΘ ”.

(xi) In Proposition 5.2, (iii), the phrase “bi-Kummer N -th root of the N -th root of
(i)” should read “bi-Kummer N -th root of (i)”.

4

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

(xii) The phrase “a ...-multiple” should be replaced by the phrase “an ...-multiple”
in the second paragraph of the proof of Theorem 1.6 [one instance]; the discussion
following Remark 2.6.1 [two instances].
(xiii) In the discussion following Remark 2.6.1, the phrase “determines a class”
should be replaced by the phrase “arises from a class”.
(xiv) In the ﬁrst display of Corollary 2.18, (ii), the notation “(l · ΔΘ )” should read
“(l · Δ•Θ )”.
(xv) In the discussion of Example 3.9, (iii), the various “perf-saturations” that
occur may be replaced simply by “perfections”. That is to say, the notion of “perfsaturation in a monoid that is already perfect” is entirely equivalent to the usual
notion of the “perfection” of a monoid. In particular, although there is no inaccuracy in the description of the relevant monoids as “perf-saturations”, the notion of
a “perf-saturation” [which is not applied elsewhere in the present paper] is, in fact,
unnecessary in the present paper.
(xvi) In Deﬁnition 3.3, (i), (c), the assertion that “iH ∈ I is necessarily unique” is
false, in general. The intended assertion here is the assertion [which is immediate
from the deﬁnitions involved!] that “Δﬁl,∞
⊆ H is necessarily unique”. Moreover,
iH
ﬁl,∞
this uniqueness of ΔiH is entirely suﬃcient, from the point of view of concluding
that the notion of the “Δﬁl -closure of H in Δ” is well-deﬁned.
(xvii) In Proposition 1.3; Proposition 1.4, (iii); Theorem 1.6, (iii); Remark 1.6.4, the
notation “∈” applied to collections of cohomology classes should, strictly speaking,
be a “⊆”.
(xviii) In the explanation immediately following the display of Proposition 1.5,
(iii), it should also have been noted that the notation “log(Ü )” is used to denote
the Kummer class, written additively, of the meromorphic function Ü on Ÿ.
(xix) In the discussion immediately following the display of the paragraph immediately preceding Deﬁnition 2.13, the slightly rough explanation constituted by the
phrase
“of K × on Πtp
Y [μN ], which induces ... and the kernel of this quotient.”
should be replaced by the following more precise description:
“of K × on Πtp
Y [μN ]; that is to say, each outer automorphism in the image of K × lifts to an automorphism of Πtp
Y [μN ] that induces the identity
tp
automorphism of both the quotient Πtp
Y [μN ]  ΠY and the kernel of this
quotient.”

(xx) Strictly speaking, the deﬁnition of the monoid “Φell
W ” given in Example 3.9,
(iii), leads to certain technical diﬃculties, which are, in fact, entirely irrelevant to

COMMENTS ON “THE ÉTALE THETA FUNCTION”

5

the theory of the present paper. These technical diﬃculties may be averted by
making the following slight modiﬁcations to the text of Example 3.9, as follows:
(xx-1) In the discussion following the ﬁrst display of Example 3.9, (i), the phrase
“Y log is of genus 1” should be replaced by the phrase “Y log is of genus 1
and has either precisely one cusp or precisely two cusps whose diﬀerence
is a 2-torsion element of the underlying elliptic curve”.
(xx-2) In the discussion following the ﬁrst display of Example 3.9, (i), the phrase
the lower arrow of the diagram to be “Ẋ

log

→ Ċ

log

”

should be replaced by the phrase
the lower arrow of the diagram to be “Ẋ log → Ċ log ”.
(xx-3) In the discussion following the ﬁrst display of Example 3.9, (ii), the
phrase “unramiﬁed over the cusps of ...” should be replaced by the phrase
“unramiﬁed over the cusps as well as over the generic points of the irreducible components of the special ﬁbers of the stable models of ...”. Also,
the phrase “tempered coverings of the underlying ...” should be replaced
by the phrase “tempered admissible coverings of the underlying ...”.
In a word, the thrust of both the original text and the slight modiﬁcations just
discussed is that the monoid “Φell
W ” is to be deﬁned to be just large enough to
include precisely those divisors which are necessary in order to treat the theta
functions that appear in the present paper.
(xxi) In the second paragraph of §1, it should have been mentioned explicitly that
X denotes the underlying formal scheme of the formal log scheme Xlog . In a similar
vein, in the third paragraph of §1, it should have been mentioned explicitly that X
denotes the underlying scheme of the log scheme X log .
(xxii) In the ﬁnal sentence of Remark 2.6.1, the phrase “by taken” should read “by
taking”.
(xxiii) In Remark 2.18.2, the phrase “this may” should read “that may”.
∼

(xxiv) In Corollary 2.19, (ii), the notation “αM : MM → MM ” should read “αM :
∼
MM → M•M ”.
(xxv) In the discussion preceding Deﬁnition 3.3, the phrase “of the p-adic completion” should read “on the p-adic completion”.
(xxvi) In Remark 3.6.4, the phrase “of a tempered Frobenioids” should read “of a
tempered Frobenioid”.
(xxvii) In the ﬁrst paragraph of §4, the phrase
“bi-Kummer theory” theory developed here
should read as follows:
“bi-Kummer theory” developed here

6

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

(xxviii) In the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof of Proposition 4.3, the phrase “the fact
the monoid” should read “the fact that the monoid”.
(xxix) In Remark 5.12.2, the phrase “given given collection” should read “given
collection”; the phrase “the fact there is” should read “the fact that there is”.
(xxx) Concerning the classical theory of theta functions on Tate curves, some readers have remarked that the exposition that may be found in “[Mumf], pp. 306-307”
is not suﬃciently detailed. One reader has remarked in this context that he found
the exposition given in [3], Chapter I, §2, and [3], Chapter II, §5, to be helpful.
(xxxi) In Proposition 1.3, the text “whose restriction to ... Moreover,” surrounding
the third to last display should read as follows:
whose restriction
1
1
H 1 (ΔΘ , ΔΘ ) = Hom(ΔΘ , ΔΘ )
2
2
tp Θ
1
Θ
to ΔΘ ⊆ (Δtp
Y ) ⊆ (ΠY ) is given by the natural inclusion ΔΘ → 2 ΔΘ .
Moreover,

(xxxii) In the second display of Corollary 2.19, (iii), the notation “H 1 (Ÿ , (l · ΔΘ ))”
should read as follows:
, (l · ΔΘ ))
H 1 (Πtp
Ÿ
(xxxiii) We remark that in the paragraph preceding Corollary 2.9, the “labels”
referred to in the phrase
“we thus obtain labels ∈ Z for the cusps of Ÿ

log

”

should be understood as consisting of some map — i.e., from the set of cusps of
log
to Z — which is not necessarily injective!
Ÿ
(xxxiv) In Theorem 3.7, (ii), the phrase “Suppose D” should read “Suppose that
D”.
(xxxv) In Proposition 2.4, it should also have been stated that the notation “Ÿlog ”
log
” of Proposition 2.4 as
is used to denote the covering associated to the curve “X
in the discussion of §1 [i.e., the discussion preceding Lemma 1.2, applied in the case
log
where “X log ” is taken to be the “X
” of Proposition 2.4].
(xxxvi) At the beginning of the proof of Lemma 2.17, the phrase “a set of generators
of H” should read “a set of free generators of [the free discrete group] H”.
(xxxvii) In the explanation immediately following the ﬁrst display of Deﬁnition
2.10, the phrase “cyclotomic envelope” should read “[mod N ] cyclotomic envelope”.
(xxxviii) In the ﬁrst sentence of Deﬁnition 2.13, (ii), “folows” should read “follows”.

COMMENTS ON “THE ÉTALE THETA FUNCTION”

7

(xxxix) In Remark 2.18.2, the phrase “appears as an object this may” should read
“appears as an object that may”.
log
→ Z log corresponds to the subgroup
(xl) In Deﬁnition 3.3, (ii), the phrase “Z∞
log
log
Δiﬁl,∞ ⊆ Δtp
→ X log correspond to the
X ” should read “the coverings Z∞ → Z
tp
⊆ Δﬁl
ﬁltration of subgroups Δﬁl,∞
i ⊆ ΔX ”.
i

(xli) In Example 3.9, (i), it should be noted that the “X log ” and “Y log ” of Example
3.9 diﬀer from the “X log ” and “Y log ” of §1, §2.
(xlii) The following sentence should be inserted immediately following the ﬁrst
sentence of Example 3.9, (iii):
[Here, we note that one veriﬁes immediately [cf. the discussion of Deﬁnition 3.3, (i), (ii)] that there exists a tempered ﬁlter on Y log .]
(xliii) In the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof of Proposition 4.3, the phrase “together
with the fact the monoid” should read “together with the fact that the monoid”.
(xliv) The following sentence [is, in fact, implicit, but, for the sake of clarity] could
be inserted at the beginning of the discussion immediately following Remark 2.6.1:
In the following discussion, we assume that the hypotheses on K and l
made at the beginning of Deﬁnition 2.5 are in force, i.e., that l is odd,
that K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp of odd residue characteristic, and that
K = K̈.
(xlv) The data that constitutes the third and [when it exists] fourth member(s) of
the collection of data used to specify the model mono- and bi-theta environments in
the ﬁrst sentence of Proposition 2.14, (iii), and the ﬁfth display of Corollary 2.18 is
a section [i.e., as opposed to a “μN -conjugacy class of subgroups determined by the
image of a section”, as stipulated in Deﬁnition 2.13, (ii), (c), and Deﬁnition 2.13,
(iii), (c), (d)]. Thus, in order for this sort of collection of data to conform to the
requirements of the deﬁnition of a model mono- or bi-theta environment, one should
understand the notation of these sections as a sort of shorthand for the phrase “the
μN -conjugacy class of subgroups determined by the image of the section ...”.
def

def

(xlvi) With regard to the notation “X = X ×OK K” and “Y = Y ×OK K” that
appears in the second and ﬁfth paragraphs of §1, we note the following: These
objects X and Y are deﬁned as the ringed spaces obtained by tensoring the structure
sheaves of X and Y over OK with K. Thus, if, for instance, Y is the formal scheme
obtained as the formal inverse limit of an inverse system of schemes
. . . → Yn → Yn+1 → . . .
— where n ranges over the positive integers, and each “→” is a nilpotent thickening
— and U is an aﬃne open of the common underlying topological space of the Yn ,

8

SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI

then the rings of sections of the respective structure sheaves OY , OY of Y, Y over
U are, by deﬁnition, given as follows:
def

lim
OY (U ) = ←
− OYn (U );
n

def

OY (U ) = OY (U ) ⊗OK K.

Here, we observe that OY (U ) is the p-adic completion of a normal noetherian ring
of ﬁnite type over OK . In particular, we observe that one may consider ﬁnite étale
coverings of Y , i.e., by considering systems of ﬁnite étale algebras AU over the
various OY (U ) [that is to say, as U is allowed to vary over the aﬃne opens of
the Yn ] equipped with gluings over the intersections of the various U that appear.
Note, moreover, that by considering the normalizations of the OY (U ) in AU , we
conclude [cf. the discussion of the Remark immediately following Theorem 2.6 in
Section II of [4]] that
def

(NorFor) any such system {AU }U may be obtained as the W = W ×OK K for
some formal scheme W that is ﬁnite over Y, and that arises as the formal
inverse limit of an inverse system of schemes
. . . → Wn → Wn+1 → . . .
— where n ranges over the positive integers; each “→” is a nilpotent
thickening; for each aﬃne open V of the common underlying topological
space of the Wn , OW (V ) is the p-adic completion of a normal noetherian
ring of ﬁnite type over OK .
Indeed, this follows from well-known considerations in commutative algebra, which
we review as follows. Let R be a normal noetherian ring of ﬁnite type over a
complete discrete valuation ring A [i.e., such as OK in the above discussion] with
maximal ideal mA and quotient ﬁeld F such that R is separated in the mA -adic
topology. Thus, since A is excellent [cf. [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (iii)], it follows [cf. [5],
 of R is
Scholie 7.8.3, (ii)] that R is excellent, hence that the mA -adic completion R
also normal [cf. [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (v)]. Then it is well-known and easily veriﬁed [by
applying a well-known argument involving the trace map] that the normalization
 Let S be
 in any ﬁnite étale algebra over R
 ⊗A F is a ﬁnite algebra over R.
of R
 Then it follows immediately from a suitable version
such a ﬁnite algebra over R.
of “Hensel’s Lemma” [cf., e.g., the argument of [6], Lemma 2.1] that S may be
obtained, as the notation suggests, as the mA -adic completion of a ﬁnite algebra
S over R, which may in fact be assumed to be separated in the mA -adic topology
and [by replacing S by its normalization and applying [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (v), (vi)]
normal. Let f ∈ R be an element that maps to a non-nilpotent element of R/mA ·R.
def
def
f , Sf for the respective mA -adic completions
Write Rf = R[f −1 ]; Sf = S ⊗R Rf ; R
of Rf , Sf . Then it follows again from [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (v), that Sf , which may

be naturally identiﬁed [since S is a ﬁnite algebra over R] with S ⊗R
 Rf , is normal.
That is to say, it follows immediately that
(NorForZar) the operation of forming normalizations [i.e., as in the above discussion]
is compatible with Zariski localization on the given formal scheme.
On the other hand, one veriﬁes immediately that (NorFor) follows formally from
(NorForZar).

COMMENTS ON “THE ÉTALE THETA FUNCTION”

9

Bibliography
[1] S. Mochizuki, The Proﬁnite Grothendieck Conjecture for Closed Hyperbolic
Curves over Number Fields, J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo 3 (1996), pp. 571-627.
[2] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids I: The General Theory, Kyushu J.
Math. 62 (2008), pp. 293-400.
[3] A. Robert, Elliptic curves. Notes from postgraduate lectures given in Lausanne
1971/72, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 326, Springer-Verlag (1973).
[4] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations, Proceedings of the First JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press (1990), pp.
25-79.
[5] A. Grothendieck and J. Dieudonné, Éléments de géométrie algébrique IV,
Étude locale des schémas et des morphismes de schémas, Séconde partie, Publ.
Math. IHES 24 (1965).
[6] S. Mochizuki, Topics in Absolute Anabelian Geometry II: Decomposition Groups
and Endomorphisms, J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo 20 (2013), pp. 171-269.

