idGamma version 2.0
Contents
   Section 1 *** introduction
   Section 2 *** Installation
   Section 3 *** running the program
   Section 4 *** recommendations
   Section 5 *** how this program works
   Section 6 *** known problems
   Section 7 *** Version Differences
   Section 8 *** disclaimer
   Section 9 *** credits and e-mail

Section 1 *** Introduction
---------------------------

-idGamma was written and tested for quake 1, quake 2, Hexen2 and sin

-This program simply replaces the original id palettes with brighter colors.
 No files are modified, a pak file is added to your pak file directory.
 for quake2, your autoexec.cfg and config.cfg files are also changed.

You can set the Quake2 default intensity

-Intensity: How bright everything is
          1 = ( original ) 1.4 is more bright
          This variable works just like the quake2 intensity command
          except you have added options (see allow saturation below)
-gamma:   how light everyting is
          1 = ( original ) .9 is lighter
          when combined with the intensity command you can have effects
          like the gama setting in the non-gl versions of your id game
-for quake 2
          As well as the changes in quake1 and Hexen2 you can .....

          Change the gl_modulate. (How light the shadows are)
          1=original? 2 is brighter

          FullBright Intensity: brightness flames, blood, lava and explosions
          Fullbrights are colors that are bright no matter what the lighting
          level is.
          1 = ( original ) 1.4 is more bright
          This variable works just like the quake2 intensity command
          except you have added options (see allow saturation below)

          There is an option called Fix Lava, which will replace all Lava
          in quake2 with Lava I adapted from quake1.
          
-You can set the saturation level
         This changes how much the really bright colors get replaced with white
         or change color. 0 gives no saturation while 1 or more increases the saturation

  
-By trying different values you should be able to get your id game
 to look just the way you want!
 See Optimal settings in section 4 (recomendations) below

-This program was optimized using a PCI viper v330 Riva 128 with
 official nvidia beta 2 release drivers, under windows 95
 Later versions were developed using a Matrox g200 and nvidia TNT.

Section 2 *** Installation:
---------------------------

-unzip "idGamma.zip" into its own directory.

-create a shortcut on your desktop to idGamma.exe
 ( this is so you can try different values quickly )

Section 3 *** Running the program:
---------------------------

-use the shortcut created, or at the dos prompt, type idGamma
 or find it in explorer and doubleclick on it.

-The program prompts you for the variables and shows you the last values you
 used see section 1 introduction and section 4 Recommendations
 for details on variables above for details on operation.

-You must reload the first map in quake 1 and Hexen 2
 at the start of the game, just type map restart in the console.
        (see section 6 problems for details)

Section 4 *** Recommendations
---------------------------
-Try using the default settings first, then adjust 1 variable at a time to look at the differences

Section 5 *** How this program works.
---------------------------
-idGamma creates a pak file in your pak file directory
 (ID1 for quake, Baseq2 for quake2, and data1 for hexen2)
 This pak file contains a modified palette that is read by your game each time it is loaded.

-Palett.lmp consists of 256 colors,
 each color has 1 byte for Red, 1 byte for green, and 1 byte for blue
 each byte goes from 0 to 255
 0 is darkest and 255 is lightest

-from here on r stands for red g stands for green and b stands for blue
 so rgb means red green blue

-Intensity makes everything brighter
 the rgb values are multiplied by intensity
 Intensity of 1.4 makes every thing 1.4 times as bright 
 a good range of values would be between 1.4 & 2

-gamma makes things lighter by adding white to each color
 good values are between 0.8 and 1

-To replace the Lava in quake2, I added all the new lava textures into 
 the pak file generated by idgamma

-this program was written in dos basic, idGamma.BAS
 and uncommented source code is included in idGamma.zip

 for more info see the file idgammafaq.txt

Section 6 *** Known Problems.
---------------------------

-every time you start glquake of glhexen you must reload the first map you use
 to get a brighter picture, this problem is especially annoying when
 running glquakeworld. (note: you only have to do this ONCE
 for every time you start the game.)(If you let a demo run in glquake 1
 (you don't need to restart the first map.)

-idGamma is not compatable with Gamelaunch. You will have to modify
 your seperate configurations yourself.

-idGamma may have strange lighting effects on a voodoo card with glquake1
 3dfx is stumped at this. One person claims that the older 3dfx drivers worked for him but he   cannot duplicate the setup when he upgraded his drivers. (for quake2 idGamma will work fine)
 (I believe I solved this problem with idGamma 2.0. If you have any problems please email me)

-You should delete pak files generated by older versions than idGamma 2.0

Section 7 *** Version Differences
---------------------------
Version 2.0   19-Oct-1998
        (first major revision since May)
	Added support for Sin
	Added support for different video card default settings
	Idgamma does not have to be installed into the pak file directory anymore
        Fixed problems with voodoo cards and quake1 and Hexen2
	Added ability to change intensity of fullbrights independently of other colors
          (Fullbrights are colors that are bright no matter what the lighting level is)
          Some examples of fullbrights are blood, lava, fire, and explosions.
	Added the option to replace Quake2 Lava with Lava adapted from Quake1
	  (idGamma makes Quake2 lava look like vomit)
        Added option to adjust skin colored textures for different video cards. (Fix Skin)
	Major improvements in the user interface.
	IdGamma 95 is no longer compatible with idGamma. (this will be fixed soon)
	IdGamma.dat and the Pak file generated by older versions of idGamma are not
          compatible with idGamma 2.0 or above.
	Fixed problem when idgamma.dat file is missing, it reported that the PAK files
	  are missing
	Updated idGamma.txt and idGammafaq.txt.

Version 1.3b  24-Aug-1998
        Fixed compatibility issue with Quake2 3.18b (also works with Quake2 3.19)
	added clarification about voodoo cards and glquake1
        in this idgamma.txt file

Version 1.3a  15-Aug-1998
        Fixed compatibility issue with bill.bat file included in
        idgamma.zip

Version 1.3   11-Aug-1998
	Fixed bug where gl_modulate variable shown when Quake1
        and Hexen2 game selected.
        
        Made Program more compatible with windows idGamma shell
        Being developed by Pedro Domingos.

        Updated faq

Version 1.2d  3-July-1998

	Added Compatility with Quake 2 Version 3.17

Version 1.2c  29-May-1998

	Added Compatility with Quake 2 Version 3.15 

Version 1.2b  20-May-1998

        Fixed bug for when idGamma was run on a directory where there was no
	autoexec.cfg or no config.cfg
	
	Updated this file to include problems with gamelaunch (Section 6)

Version 1.2a  18-May-1998

        Fixed bug where idGamma was not removing the line gl_modulate
	from config.cfg and autoexec.cfg properly

Version 1.2  17-May-1998

        Added idGamma_faq.txt  to zip file

	Explosions now brighter.

	Replaced option 1 (allow some saturation a) with (allow no saturation).
	
	Improved algorithm for grey colors in Allow saturation options 1 and 2
	
	Added ability to read external file for Optimal inputs (can be downloaded separately)

	Improved in user interface

	Added command line so that you can automatically load optimal settings without user inputs.

	it Now directly modifies Ref_gl.dll, config.cfg and autoexec.cfg files.
	
Version 1.1  9-May-1998
	Added optimized algorithm for intensity > 2 (inserted option 2 of allow saturation)
	
	For quake2, fullbrights now only include colors used in flames & explosions.
	
	Eliminated bug when entering 1 for intensity, caused program to fail
		Thanks to voodoovixen for pointing this out.
Version 1    8-May-1998
	Before version 1, I had a limeted use utility called palette that worked for glquake only.
	It worked fairly well, but was hard to use.

Section 8 *** Disclamer, Credits and e-mail:
---------------------------

-Usage of the this archive is at your own risk. I accept NO responsibility
 for any form of damage or lost files incurred through the usage of
 this archive.
           
Section 9 *** Credits and e-mail:
---------------------------
My thanks to the following:

            Nvidia for the great but annoying Riva128
		    I shouldn't complain, I bought the card for 2d ;)
            Tom of Tom's Hardware Guide for his "Mr Ugly" review 
            id for Quake
            Thanks also go to those of you who gave me suggestions for this
	version.
                And especially Wynsen Vlagsma
                  ( for giving me the idea of changing palette )
                  and for various posts under the name StaTaQue

(for a more complete listing of the credits goto http://dimension128.smartcom.net/idGamma/credits/)

Look for me on the riva discussion boards.
Bill
farmer@esslink.com
